add python sdk for SL (#5801)
dbt-labs/docs.getdbt.com: website/docs/docs/dbt-cloud-apis/sl-python-sdk.md

---
title: "Python SDK"
id: sl-python
description: "Learn how to use the dbt Semantic Layer SDK for Python library to interact with the dbt Semantic Layer."
tags: [Semantic Layer, APIs]
keywords: [dbt Cloud, API, dbt Semantic Layer, python]
sidebar_label: "Python SDK"
---

> The [`dbt-sl-sk` Python software development kit](https://github.com/dbt-labs/semantic-layer-sdk-python) (SDK) is a Python library that provides you with easy access to the dbt Semantic Layer with Python. It allows developers to interact with the Semantic Layer APIs and query metrics and dimensions in downstream tools.

Reviewer: There's a typo, the package name is `dbt-sl-sdk`

## Installation

To install the SDK, you'll need to specify optional dependencies depending on whether you want to use it synchronously (backed by [requests](https://github.com/psf/requests/)) or with asynchronous ([asyncio](https://docs.python.org/3/library/asyncio.html) backed by [aiohttp](https://github.com/aio-libs/aiohttp/)).

<Tabs>
<TabItem value="sync" label="Sync installation">

Sync installation means your program waits for each task to finish before moving on to the next one. 

It's simpler and easier to understand. Suitable for smaller tasks or when your program doesn't need to handle many tasks at the same time.

```bash
pip install dbt-sl-sdk[sync]
```
</TabItem>

<TabItem value="async" label="Async installation">

Async installation means your program can start a task and then move on to other tasks while waiting for the first one to finish.

> It can handle many tasks at once without waiting, making it faster and more efficient for larger tasks or when you need to manage multiple tasks at the same time.

Reviewer: I'd also add (although users should already know this when the use `asyncio`) that if they're using something like [FastAPI](https://fastapi.tiangolo.com/) or [Strawberry](https://github.com/strawberry-graphql/strawberry), which are natively async, installing the sync version of the SDK will block their event loop and can _significantly_ slow down their program. We should strongly recommend using `async` in such cases.

Reviewer: Also maybe it would be nice to refer to Python's docs about `asyncio`. They go much more in depth there of why/when you should use one versus the other.

https://docs.python.org/3/library/asyncio.html

Reviewer: Oh, and I don't know if this is too technical, maybe we shouldn't mention it in this doc. But for the `async` version, [we're using a `ThreadPoolExecutor`](https://github.com/dbt-labs/semantic-layer-sdk-python/blob/5e52e1ca840d20a143b226ae33d194a4a9bc008f/dbtsl/api/adbc/client/asyncio.py#L62) to run `query` and `list dimension-values` (all operations that are done via ADBC), since the [Python ADBC driver](https://github.com/apache/arrow-adbc/tree/main/python/adbc_driver_manager) doesn't yet support `asyncio` natively. If they see a bunch of python threads spawning, that's why.

```bash
pip install dbt-sl-sdk[async]
```

> </TabItem>

Author: should this also belong under the 'sync' tab?

Reviewer: Yup

</Tabs>

## Usage
To run operations against the Semantic Layer APIs, instantiate (create an instance of) a `SemanticLayerClient` with your specific [API connection parameters](/docs/dbt-cloud-apis/sl-api-overview):

```python
from dbtsl import SemanticLayerClient

client = SemanticLayerClient(
    environment_id=123,
    auth_token="<your-semantic-layer-api-token>",
    host="semantic-layer.cloud.getdbt.com",
)

# query the first metric by `metric_time`
def main():
    with client.session():
        metrics = client.metrics()
        table = client.query(
            metrics=[metrics[0].name],
            group_by=["metric_time"],
        )
        print(table)

main()
```

> **Note**: All method calls that reach out to the APIs need to be within a `client.session()` context manager. This allows the client to establish a connection to the APIs only once and reuse the same connection between API calls.

Reviewer: I'd add that we discourage creating a session per request since that's very inefficient. Ideally, they should create an application-wide session, and reuse the same session throughout the app for optimal performance.

### asyncio usage
If you're using asyncio, import `AsyncSemanticLayerClient` from `dbtsl.asyncio`. The APIs of `SemanticLayerClient` and `AsyncSemanticLayerClient` are identical, but the async version has async methods that you need to `await`.

```python
import asyncio
from dbtsl.asyncio import AsyncSemanticLayerClient

client = AsyncSemanticLayerClient(
    environment_id=123,
    auth_token="<your-semantic-layer-api-token>",
    host="semantic-layer.cloud.getdbt.com",
)

async def main():
    async with client.session():
        metrics = await client.metrics()
        table = await client.query(
            metrics=[metrics[0].name],
            group_by=["metric_time"],
        )
        print(table)

asyncio.run(main())

```

## Integrate with dataframe libraries

The SDK returns all query data as [pyarrow](https://arrow.apache.org/docs/python/index.html) tables. 

> To use the data with libraries like [pandas](https://pandas.pydata.org/) or [polars](https://pola.rs/), manually convert the data into the desired format:

Reviewer: Also note that the library doesn't come bundled with Polars or Pandas since we don't wanna force users to install either of them. If they're using it, they need to add them as a dependency of their project.

---
title: "Python SDK"
id: sl-python
description: "Learn how to use the dbt Semantic Layer SDK for Python library to interact with the dbt Semantic Layer."
tags: [Semantic Layer, APIs]
keywords: [dbt Cloud, API, dbt Semantic Layer, python]
sidebar_label: "Python SDK"
---

> 

Author: ```suggestion

# Python SDK <Lifecycle status="beta"/>
```

---
title: "Python SDK"
id: sl-python

> description: "Learn how to use the dbt Semantic Layer SDK for Python library to interact with the dbt Semantic Layer."

Reviewer 2: We're calling it the Python SDK everywhere else, but the Semantic Layer SDK here. Might be a little confusing

tags: [Semantic Layer, APIs]
keywords: [dbt Cloud, API, dbt Semantic Layer, python]
sidebar_label: "Python SDK"
---

> # Python SDK <Lifecycle status="beta"/>

Author: ```suggestion
# Python SDK <Lifecycle status="Preview"/>
```

> # Python SDK <Lifecycle status="beta"/>

Reviewer 2: Do we need to mention anything about Python versions in this doc?

Author: good shout!

The [`dbt-sl-sdk` Python software development kit](https://github.com/dbt-labs/semantic-layer-sdk-python) (SDK) is a Python library that provides you with easy access to the dbt Semantic Layer with Python. It allows developers to interact with the Semantic Layer APIs and query metrics and dimensions in downstream tools.

## Installation

> To install the SDK, you'll need to specify optional dependencies depending on whether you want to use it synchronously (backed by [requests](https://github.com/psf/requests/)) or with asynchronous ([asyncio](https://docs.python.org/3/library/asyncio.html) backed by [aiohttp](https://github.com/aio-libs/aiohttp/)).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To install the SDK, you'll need to specify optional dependencies depending on whether you want to use it synchronously, backed by [requests](https://github.com/psf/requests/), or with asynchronous ([asyncio](https://docs.python.org/3/library/asyncio.html) backed by [aiohttp](https://github.com/aio-libs/aiohttp/)).
```

<Tabs>
<TabItem value="sync" label="Sync installation">

Sync installation means your program waits for each task to finish before moving on to the next one. 

> It's simpler and easier to understand. Suitable for smaller tasks or when your program doesn't need to handle many tasks at the same time.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It's simpler, easier to understand, and suitable for smaller tasks or when your program doesn't need to handle many tasks at the same time.
```

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

## Usage
To run operations against the Semantic Layer APIs, instantiate (create an instance of) a `SemanticLayerClient` with your specific [API connection parameters](/docs/dbt-cloud-apis/sl-api-overview):

```python
from dbtsl import SemanticLayerClient

client = SemanticLayerClient(
    environment_id=123,
    auth_token="<your-semantic-layer-api-token>",
    host="semantic-layer.cloud.getdbt.com",
)

# query the first metric by `metric_time`
def main():
    with client.session():
        metrics = client.metrics()
        table = client.query(
            metrics=[metrics[0].name],
            group_by=["metric_time"],
        )
        print(table)

main()
```

**Note**: All method calls that reach out to the APIs need to be within a `client.session()` context manager. This allows the client to establish a connection to the APIs only once and reuse the same connection between API calls. 

> We recommend creating an application-wide session and reuse the same session throughout the application for optimal performance. Creating a session per request is discouraged and inefficient.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We recommend creating an application-wide session and reusing the same session throughout the application for optimal performance. Creating a session per request is discouraged and inefficient.
```

### asyncio usage

> If you're using asyncio, import `AsyncSemanticLayerClient` from `dbtsl.asyncio`. The APIs of `SemanticLayerClient` and `AsyncSemanticLayerClient` are identical, but the async version has async methods that you need to `await`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you're using asyncio, import `AsyncSemanticLayerClient` from `dbtsl.asyncio`. The `SemanticLayerClient` and `AsyncSemanticLayerClient` APIs are identical, but the async version has async methods that you need to `await`.
```

```python
import asyncio
from dbtsl.asyncio import AsyncSemanticLayerClient

client = AsyncSemanticLayerClient(
    environment_id=123,
    auth_token="<your-semantic-layer-api-token>",
    host="semantic-layer.cloud.getdbt.com",
)

async def main():
    async with client.session():
        metrics = await client.metrics()
        table = await client.query(
            metrics=[metrics[0].name],
            group_by=["metric_time"],
        )
        print(table)

asyncio.run(main())

```

## Integrate with dataframe libraries

The SDK returns all query data as [pyarrow](https://arrow.apache.org/docs/python/index.html) tables. 

> The SDK library doesn't come bundled with [Polars](https://pola.rs/) or [Pandas](https://pandas.pydata.org/). If you use these libraries, add them as dependencies in your project.

Reviewer 2: Maybe a little more positive language
```suggestion
If you use [Polars](https://pola.rs/) or [Pandas](https://pandas.pydata.org/) libraries, you need to add them as dependencies in your project.
```

Author: what about this? i do prefer being explicit:

> If you use [Polars](https://pola.rs/) or [Pandas](https://pandas.pydata.org/) libraries, you need to add them as dependencies in your project.  This is because the SDK library provides you with the flexibility to choose your data processing tool and doesn't come bundled with them.

Author: cc @serramatutu

> The SDK library doesn't come bundled with [Polars](https://pola.rs/) or [Pandas](https://pandas.pydata.org/). If you use these libraries, add them as dependencies in your project.

Author: ```suggestion
If you use [Polars](https://pola.rs/) or [Pandas](https://pandas.pydata.org/) libraries, you need to add them as dependencies in your project. This is because the SDK library provides you with the flexibility to choose your data processing tool and doesn't come bundled with them.
```

To use the data with libraries like Polars or Pandas, manually convert the data into the desired format. For example:

> #### If you're using pandas

Reviewer 2: Might be easier to link to
```suggestion
#### Pandas
```

Author: i totally understand your bit here and that was my original header but i do also like writing to the user (as mentioned by @runleonarun previously) so opted for the 'you're using'. I'm happy to keep it as is since its an h4 unless you have strong feelings.

```python
# ... initialize client

arrow_table = client.query(...)
pandas_df = arrow_table.to_pandas()

```

> #### If you're using polars

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#### Polars
```

Author: same as above

```python
import polars as pl

# ... initialize client

arrow_table = client.query(...)
polars_df = pl.from_arrow(arrow_table)
```

## Usage examples

> For additional usage examples, check out our [usage examples](https://github.com/dbt-labs/semantic-layer-sdk-python/tree/main/examples), some which include:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For additional usage examples, check out the [usage examples](https://github.com/dbt-labs/semantic-layer-sdk-python/tree/main/examples), some of which include:
```

---
title: "Python SDK"
id: sl-python
description: "Learn how to use the dbt Semantic Layer Python SDK library to interact with the dbt Semantic Layer."
tags: [Semantic Layer, APIs]

> keywords: [dbt Cloud, API, dbt Semantic Layer, python]

Author: ```suggestion
keywords: [dbt Cloud, API, dbt Semantic Layer, python, sdk]
```
